A discussion on helping downstream packaging (#1791)
pypa/packaging.python.org: source/discussions/downstream-packaging.rst

of pure Python packages that provide universal wheels. The reasons for using
source distributions may include:

- being able to **audit the source code** of all packages

- being able to **run the test suite and build documentation**

- being able to **easily apply patches**, including backporting commits
  from your repository and sending patches back to you

- being able to **build on a specific platform** that is not covered
  by upstream builds

- being able to **build against specific versions of system libraries**

- having a consistent build process across all Python packages

While it is usually possible to build packages from a git repository, there are
a few important reasons to provide a static archive file instead:

- Fetching a single file is often **more efficient, more reliable and better
  supported** than e.g. using a git clone. This can help users with a shoddy
  Internet connection.

- Downstreams often **use checksums to verify the authenticity** of source files
  on subsequent builds, which require that they remain bitwise identical over
  time. For example, automatically generated git archives do not guarantee

>   that.

Reviewer: For this use case, there's an important property that hashes offer that checksums don't: resistance against the *intentional* generation of collisions. If we're only going to mention one of the two categories, it should be hashes.

Checksums offer the property that small bit differences in the input will change the checksum, but don't offer *any* assurance that significantly different inputs will give different checksum (e.g. some checksum algorithms won't detect full byte swaps, since they're not dependent on the order of operations). Most significantly, given a current checksum and a desired checksum, it's often possible to determine what input data to insert or append to get the desired result. Still good for checking transmission integrity (since they're usually cheaper to calculate than hashes), but not trustworthy when it comes to preventing malicious substitution of artifacts.

Hash algorithms offer much stronger collision resistance guarantees, to the point that they're considered broken if there are known techniques for producing distinct inputs that emit the same hash more efficiently than would be expected given the number of bits in the hash output. This can detect both transmission errors *and* intentional substitution.

(And after writing all that, I noted the "Outdated" tag and realised the wording had already been changed accordingly, so there's no further changes needed here)

using the unpacked distribution rather than the git repostiry — run tests,
build documentation, build wheels. This ensures that it is well-tested,
and reduces the risk that some users would hit build failures or install
an incomplete package.

.. _Do not use the Internet during the build process:

Do not use the Internet during the build process
------------------------------------------------
Why?
~~~~
Downstream builds are frequently done in sandboxed environments that **cannot
access the Internet**. Even if this is not the case, and assuming that you took
sufficient care to **properly authenticate downloads**, using the Internet
is discouraged for a number of reasons:

- The Internet **connection may be unstable** (e.g. due to poor reception)
  or suffer from temporary problems that could cause the process to fail
  or hang.

- The remote resources may **become temporarily or even permanently
  unavailable**, making the build no longer possible. This is especially
  problematic when someone needs to build an old package version.

- Accessing remote servers poses a **privacy** issue and a potential
  **security** issue, as it exposes information about the system building

>   the package.

Reviewer: Makes sense, nothing further to do here.

How?
~~~~
Your source distribution should either **include all the files needed
for the package to build**, or allow provisioning them externally. Ideally,
it should not even attempt to access the Internet at all, unless explicitly
requested to. If that is not possible to achieve, the next best thing
is to **provide an opt-out switch to disable all Internet access**.

When such a switch is used, the build process should fail if some
of the required files are missing, rather than try to fetch them automatically.
This could be done e.g. by checking whether a ``NO_NETWORK`` environment
variable is set to a non-empty value. Please also remember that if you are
fetching remote resources, you must **verify their authenticity**, e.g. against
a checksum, to protect against the file being substituted by a malicious party.

Since downstreams frequently also run tests and build documentation, the above
should ideally extend to these processes as well.

.. _Support building against system dependencies:

Support building against system dependencies
--------------------------------------------
Why?
~~~~
Some Python projects have non-Python dependencies, such as libraries written

> in C or C++. Trying to use the system versions of these dependencies

Reviewer 2: cryptography and pydantic are the https://github.com/pypa/packaging.python.org/issues/22 and https://github.com/pypa/packaging.python.org/issues/24 most downloaded packages on pypi ([hugovk.github.io/top-pypi-packages](https://hugovk.github.io/top-pypi-packages/)) and both use a shared library written in rust. In my experience, maturin, uv and py-spy being rust binaries are the exception. Usually, they can dynamically or statically link system dependencies written in C or C++, but the vendoring concerns apply to them too.

> in C or C++. Trying to use the system versions of these dependencies

Author: > cryptography and pydantic are the https://github.com/pypa/packaging.python.org/issues/22 and https://github.com/pypa/packaging.python.org/issues/24 most downloaded packages on pypi ([hugovk.github.io/top-pypi-packages](https://hugovk.github.io/top-pypi-packages/)) and both use a shared library written in rust.

I'm confused now. Are we talking of a system library written in Rust, or a library built internally?

I feel like we're splitting hairs here. I'm not saying there could be no relevant Rust dependency. What I'm saying is that adding "Rust" here is likely to add more confusion than gain, and these are just a few examples, not an exhaustive list of programming languages used to produce shared libraries.

> in C or C++. Trying to use the system versions of these dependencies

Reviewer 3: Agree C and C++ make more sense to mention here. The libraries could also be written in Fortran or Rust but C/C++ are by far the most common in this context.

> in C or C++. Trying to use the system versions of these dependencies

Reviewer: The Rust libraries also typically won't *have* system versions available to potentially link against, so agreed that it makes sense to omit Rust from the list of examples here.

  from the library itself.

- Even for an experienced user, installing a compatible dependency version
  may be very hard. For example, the used Linux distribution may not provide
  the required version, or some **other package may require an incompatible
  version**.

- The linkage between the Python package and its system dependency is not
  recorded by the packaging system. The next system update may **upgrade
  the library to a newer version that breaks binary compatibility** with
  the Python package, and requires user intervention to fix.

For these reasons, you may reasonable to decide to either **link statically**
to your dependencies, or to provide a local copies in the installed package.
You may also **vendor the dependency** in your source distribution.  Sometimes
these dependencies are also repackaged on PyPI, and can be installed
like a regular Python packages.

However, none of these issues apply to downstream packaging, and downstreams
have good reasons to prefer **dynamically linking to system dependencies**.
In particular:

- Static linking and vendoring obscures the use of external dependencies,
  **making source auditing harder**.

> - Dynamic linking makes it possible to easily and **quickly replace the used
>   libraries**, which can be particularly important when they turn out to
>   be vulnerable or buggy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Dynamic linking makes it possible to quickly and systematically replace the used
  libraries across an entire downstream packaging ecosystem, which can be particularly
  important when they turn out to contain a security vulnerability or critical bug.
```

> - Using system dependencies makes the package benefit from **downstream
>   customization** that can improve the user experience on a particular platform,
>   without the downstream maintainers having to consistently patch
>   the dependencies vendored in different packages. This can include
>   **compatibility improvements and security hardening**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Using system dependencies makes the package benefit from downstream
  customization that can improve the user experience on a particular platform,
  without the downstream maintainers having to consistently patch
  the dependencies vendored in different packages. This can include
  compatibility improvements and security hardening.
```

> - Static linking and vendoring could result in **multiple different versions
>   of the same library being loaded in the same process** (e.g. when you use two
>   Python packages that link to different versions of the same library).
>   This can cause no problems, but it could also lead to anything from subtle
>   bugs to catastrophic failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Static linking and vendoring can result in multiple different versions of the
  same library being loaded in the same process (for example, attempting to
  import two Python packages that link to different versions of the same library).
  This sometimes works without incident, but it can also lead to anything from library
  loading errors, to subtle runtime bugs, to catastrophic system failures.
```

Author: Not sure if "system failures" won't be misleading here. My point was more like risk of data loss.

Reviewer: Fair, something like `... catastrophic failures (like losing data, or rendering the system unable to boot)` could be clearer.

> - Last but not least, static linking and vendoring results in duplication,
>   and may increase the **use of both the disk space and memory**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Last but not least, static linking and vendoring results in duplication,
  and may increase the use of both disk space and memory.
```

How?

> ~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~

```

> A good compromise between the needs of both parties is to **provide a switch
> between using vendored and system dependencies**. Ideally, if the package has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good compromise between the needs of both parties is to provide a switch
between using vendored and system dependencies. Ideally, if the package has
```

multiple vendored dependencies, it should provide both individual switches
for each dependency, and a general switch to control the default for them,
e.g. via a ``USE_SYSTEM_DEPS`` environment variable.

> If the user requests using system dependencies, and **a particular dependency
> is either missing or incompatible, the build should fail** with an explanatory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the user requests using system dependencies, and a particular dependency
is either missing or incompatible, the build should fail with an explanatory
```

message rather than fall back to a vendored version. This gives the packager
the opportunity to notice their mistake and a chance to consciously decide
how to solve it.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Note that it is reasonable for upstream projects to leave *testing* of building with
system dependencies to their downstream repackagers. The goal of these guidelines
is to facilitate more effective collaboration between upstream projects and downstream
repackagers, not to suggest upstream projects take on tasks that downstream repackagers
are better equipped to handle.
```

> .. _Support downstream testing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _support-downstream-testing:
```

Support downstream testing

> --------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--------------------------

```

Why?

> ~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~

```

A variety of downstream projects run some degree of testing on the packaged
Python projects. Depending on the particular case, this can range from minimal
smoke testing to comprehensive runs of the complete test suite. There can
be various reasons for doing this, for example:

> - Verifying that the downstream **packaging did not introduce any bugs**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Verifying that the downstream packaging did not introduce any bugs.
```

> - Testing on **additional platforms** that are not covered by upstream testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Testing on additional platforms that are not covered by upstream testing.
```

> - Finding subtle bugs that can only be reproduced on a **particular hardware,
>   system package versions**, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Finding subtle bugs that can only be reproduced with particular hardware,
  system package versions, and so on.
```

> - Testing the released package against **newer dependency versions** than
>   the ones present during upstream release testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Testing the released package against newer (or older) dependency versions than
  the ones present during upstream release testing.
```

Author: I'm okay with changing this, but my idea was to avoid "why aren't you using up-to-date packages?" argument.

Reviewer: Reasonable concern, but I think prioritising the "newer" case in the text will cover it (maybe that's overly optimistic, but we can always drop the parenthetical bit later if we need to)

> - Testing the package in an environment closely resembling **the production
>   setup**. This can detect issues caused by nontrivial interactions between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Testing the package in an environment closely resembling the production
  setup. This can detect issues caused by nontrivial interactions between
```

  different installed packages, including packages that are not dependencies
  of your package, but nevertheless can cause issues.

> - Testing the released package against **newer Python versions** (including

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Testing the released package against newer Python versions (including
```

  newer point releases), or less tested Python implementations such as PyPy.

> Admittedly, sometimes downstream testing may yield false positives or
> inconvenience you about scenarios that you are not interested in supporting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Admittedly, sometimes downstream testing may yield false positives or bug
reports about scenarios the upstream project is not interested in supporting.
```

> However, perhaps even more often it does provide early notice of problems,
> or find nontrivial bugs that would otherwise cause issues for your users
> in production. And believe me, the majority of **downstream packagers are doing
> their best to double-check their results, and help you triage and fix the bugs
> that they report**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, perhaps even more often it does provide early notice of problems,
or find non-trivial bugs that would otherwise cause issues for the upstream
project's users. While mistakes do happen, the majority of downstream packagers
are doing their best to double-check their results, and help their upstream projects
triage and fix the bugs that they report.
```

Author: I think "their" is mixing subjects here at the end, or at least "downstream packagers' upstream projects" sounds weird to me.

Reviewer: Yeah, the wording you used instead is better than what I proposed.

How?

> ~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~

```

> There is a number of things that you can do to help us test your package
> better. Some of them were already mentioned in this discussion. Some examples
> are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a number of things that upstream projects can do to help downstream
repackagers test their packages efficiently and effectively, including some of the suggestions
already mentioned above. These are typically improvements that make the test suite more
reliable and easier to use for everyone, not just downstream packagers.
Some specific suggestions are:
```

Author: That's very nice, thanks!

> - **Include the test files and fixtures in the source distribution**, or make it
>   possible to easily download them separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Include the test files and fixtures in the source distribution, or make it
  possible to easily download them separately.
```

> - **Do not write to the package directories during testing.** Downstream test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Do not write to the package directories during testing. Downstream test
```

  setups sometimes run tests on top of the installed package, and modifications
  performed during testing and temporary test files may end up being part
  of the installed package!

> - **Make the test suite work offline.** Mock network interactions, using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make the test suite work offline. Mock network interactions, using
```

  packages such as responses_ or vcrpy_. If that is not possible, make it

>   possible to easily disable the tests using Internet access, e.g. via a pytest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  possible to easily disable the tests using Internet access, e.g. via a pytest_
```

  marker.  Use pytest-socket_ to verify that your tests work offline. This
  often makes your own test workflows faster and more reliable as well.

> - **Make your tests work without a specialized setup**, or perform the necessary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make your tests work without a specialized setup, or perform the necessary
```

  setup as part of test fixtures. Do not ever assume that you can connect
  to system services such as databases — in an extreme case, you could crash
  a production service!

> - **If your package has optional dependencies, make their tests optional as
>   well.** Either skip them if the needed packages are not installed, or add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If your package has optional dependencies, make their tests optional as
  well. Either skip them if the needed packages are not installed, or add
```

  markers to make deselecting easy.

> - More generally, **add markers to tests with special requirements**. These can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- More generally, add markers to tests with special requirements. These can
```

  include e.g. significant space usage, significant memory usage, long runtime,
  incompatibility with parallel testing.

> - **Do not assume that the test suite will be run with -Werror.** Downstreams

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Do not assume that the test suite will be run with ``-Werror``. Downstreams
```

  often need to disable that, as it causes false positives, e.g. due to newer
  dependency versions. Assert for warnings using ``pytest.warns()`` rather
  than ``pytest.raises()``!

> - **Aim to make your test suite reliable and reproducible.** Avoid flaky tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Aim to make your test suite reliable and reproducible. Avoid flaky tests.
```

  Avoid depending on specific platform details, don't rely on exact results
  of floating-point computation, or timing of operations, and so on. Fuzzing
  has its advantages, but you want to have static test cases for completeness
  as well.

> - **Split tests by their purpose, and make it easy to skip categories that are
>   irrelevant or problematic.** Since the primary purpose of downstream testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Split tests by their purpose, and make it easy to skip categories that are
  irrelevant or problematic. Since the primary purpose of downstream testing
```

>   is to ensure that the package itself works, we generally are not interested
>   in e.g. checking code coverage, code formatting, typing or running
>   benchmarks. These tests can fail as dependencies are upgraded or the system
>   is under load, without actually affecting the package itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is to ensure that the package itself works, downstreams are not generally interested
  in tasks such as checking code coverage, code formatting, typechecking or running
  benchmarks. These tests can fail as dependencies are upgraded or the system
  is under load, without actually affecting the package itself.
```

Reviewer: I left the examples of skipped checks as is in my edit, but skipping typechecking when upgrading dependencies actually seems a bit dubious - typecheckers will complain if an upgrade removes or changes interfaces in a dependency that a project accesses from lines that the test suite doesn't cover.

Author: Oh, I see that you've clarified here it's about uncovered tests. I've already replied to the top-level comment.

Reviewer: Good point. Since "to typecheck, or not to typecheck" is a decision downstream packagers will want to make on a case by case basis, it's a valid entry in this particular list of examples.

> - If your test suite takes significant time to run, **support testing
>   in parallel.** Downstreams often maintain a large number of packages,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If your test suite takes significant time to run, support testing
  in parallel. Downstreams often maintain a large number of packages,
```

  and testing them all takes a lot of time. Using pytest-xdist_ can help them
  avoid bottlenecks.

> - Ideally, **support running your test suite via pytest**. pytest_ has many

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ideally, support running your test suite via ``pytest``. pytest_ has many
```

  command-line arguments that are truly helpful to downstreams, such as
  the ability to conveniently deselect tests, rerun flaky tests
  (via pytest-rerunfailures_), add a timeout to prevent tests from hanging

>   (via pytest-timeout_) or run tests in parallel (via pytest-xdist_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (via pytest-timeout_) or run tests in parallel (via pytest-xdist_).
  Note that test suites don't need to be *written* with ``pytest`` to be *executed* with
  ``pytest``: ``pytest`` is able to find and execute any test cases that are compatible with
  the standard library's ``unittest`` test discovery.
```

Author: I think this might be technically incorrect — I think pytest has some limitations / deprecations, but right now I'm not 100% sure if there were related only to nosetests leftovers, or if they included some "technically valid" unittest stuff as well.

Author: https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/how-to/unittest.html says "almost all", so I've just added "almost" to your text.

Reviewer: Sounds good to me!

.. _downstream-packaging:

=================================

> Simplifying downstream packaging

Author: Hmm, thinking about it, I'm not sure if "simplifying" is really the correct term. It suggests the discussion would be about how to change downstream packaging to make it simpler. Perhaps "helping" would be a better term?

Reviewer 4: "Supporting"?

  same library being loaded in the same process (for example, attempting to
  import two Python packages that link to different versions of the same library).
  This sometimes works without incident, but it can also lead to anything from library
  loading errors, to subtle runtime bugs, to catastrophic system failures.

- Last but not least, static linking and vendoring results in duplication,
  and may increase the use of both disk space and memory.

How?
~~~~

A good compromise between the needs of both parties is to provide a switch
between using vendored and system dependencies. Ideally, if the package has
multiple vendored dependencies, it should provide both individual switches
for each dependency, and a general switch to control the default for them,
e.g. via a ``USE_SYSTEM_DEPS`` environment variable.

If the user requests using system dependencies, and a particular dependency
is either missing or incompatible, the build should fail with an explanatory
message rather than fall back to a vendored version. This gives the packager
the opportunity to notice their mistake and a chance to consciously decide

> how to solve it.

Reviewer 5: This seems like a big ask, might not be viable maintenance from the perspective of the devs.

I think that in order to do this we need more substantial changes in terms of developing the infrastructure to allow it (e.g. feature from the importlib/import machinery directly).

Author: I'm sorry but I don't understand how importlib would help when linking to system libraries.

Reviewer 5: The impression that I had when reading the text is that it emphasizes on linking but it does mention dependencies in general. For vendored dependencies that compile a Python extension, I believe the importlib/import machinery is relevant.

If the concern is exclusive to linking, then I agree with you. Maybe the text could clarify the intention?

Author: I focused specifically on external C/C++ dependencies, as mention on the top. I didn't want to get into details of Python dependencies — especially that vendoring Python dependencies is rather rare.

Reviewer 5: Does it make sense to have as title `Support linking against binary system libraries`?

Author: Perhaps. What I really wanted to convey here that there could be dependencies that aren't technically binary libraries, such as Eigen (a header-only library), or tools like CMake.

Reviewer: A potential wording improvement here might be to emphasise that this is less about folks writing these mechanisms themselves, and more about being open to PRs from downstream repackagers that add them (so the downstream redistributors aren't all having to carry a common set of patches to enable the use of system dependencies).

When submitting such PRs, the repackagers can link here to explain the purpose of the change rather than having to explain the concept from scratch themselves.

Author: Well, I think we're already making it clear that we're willing to prepare patches for everything in the top section, so I don't think we should keep repeating it. However, the point about patches is very good, so I've added it to that section — also noting that duplication may result in inconsistent solutions.

Reviewer 4: Reiterating my point about this being a co-operative process, I think it's worth *also* talking about what downstream repackagers can do to ease the maintenance burden of taking such a PR. Because it's often not the initial PR that's the problem, but the change in workflow, or the extra knowledge needed from the maintainer, which is the real cost.

Author: Do you have something specific in mind?

- Downstreams often use hashes to verify the authenticity of source files
  on subsequent builds, which require that they remain bitwise identical over
  time. For example, automatically generated git archives do not guarantee
  this, as the compressed data may change if gzip is upgraded on the server.

- Archive files can be mirrored, reducing both upstream and downstream
  bandwidth use. The actual builds can afterwards be performed in firewalled
  or offline environments, that can only access source files provided
  by the local mirror or redistributed earlier.

- Explicitly publishing archive files can ensure that any dependencies on version control
  system metadata are resolved when creating the source archive. For example, automatically
  generated git archives omit all of the commit tag information, potentially resulting in
  incorrect version details in the resulting builds.

How?
~~~~

Ideally, **a source distribution archive should include all the files**
necessary to build the package itself, run its test suite, build and install
its documentation, and any other files that may be useful to end users, such as
shell completions, editor support files, and so on.

> Some projects are concerned about increasing the size of source distribution,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Some projects are concerned about increasing the size of source distributions,
```

or do not wish Python packaging tools to fall back to source distributions
automatically.  In these cases, a good compromise may be to publish a separate
source archive for downstream use, for example by attaching it to a GitHub
release. Alternatively, large files, such as test data, can be split into
separate archives.

A good idea is to **use your source distribution in the release workflow**.
That is, build it first, then unpack it and perform all the remaining steps

> using the unpacked distribution rather than the git repostiry — run tests,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
using the unpacked distribution rather than the git repository — run tests,
```

  recorded by the packaging system. The next system update may upgrade
  the library to a newer version that breaks binary compatibility with
  the Python package, and requires user intervention to fix.

For these reasons, you may reasonably decide to either statically link
your dependencies, or to provide local copies in the installed package.
You may also vendor the dependency in your source distribution.  Sometimes
these dependencies are also repackaged on PyPI, and can be declared as
project dependencies like any other Python package.

However, none of these issues apply to downstream packaging, and downstreams
have good reasons to prefer dynamically linking to system dependencies.
In particular:

- in many cases, reliably sharing dynamic dependencies between components is a large part
  of the *purpose* of a downstream packaging ecosystem. Helping to support that makes it
  easier for users of those systems to access upstream projects in their preferred format.

- in many cases, reliably sharing dynamic dependencies between components is a large part
  of the *purpose* of a downstream packaging ecosystem. Helping to support that makes it

>   easier for users of those systems to access upstream projects in their preferred format.

Reviewer 6: Duplicated item?

Author: Good catch, tanks. Must've accidentally got duplicated when merging changes.

- Using system dependencies makes the package benefit from downstream
  customization that can improve the user experience on a particular platform,
  without the downstream maintainers having to consistently patch
  the dependencies vendored in different packages. This can include
  compatibility improvements and security hardening.

- Static linking and vendoring can result in multiple different versions of the
  same library being loaded in the same process (for example, attempting to
  import two Python packages that link to different versions of the same library).
  This sometimes works without incident, but it can also lead to anything from library
  loading errors, to subtle runtime bugs, to catastrophic system failures.

- Last but not least, static linking and vendoring results in duplication,
  and may increase the use of both disk space and memory.

How?
~~~~

A good compromise between the needs of both parties is to provide a switch
between using vendored and system dependencies. Ideally, if the package has
multiple vendored dependencies, it should provide both individual switches
for each dependency, and a general switch to control the default for them,

> e.g. via a ``USE_SYSTEM_DEPS`` environment variable.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer something that is part of the PEP 517 interface instead of using environment variables.

There should also be some discussion about how PEP 517 build systems forward this to their native build systems, e.g. how do pyo3 users setup their `Cargo.toml` so that maturin can use this switch?

Reviewer: Improving the suggested techniques here feels like something that is best  left to a future revision, since we don't *have* a good standardised mechanism (other than process environment variables) for passing information through to build systems.

Even `pip` itself relies on environment variables to consistently apply constraints files to isolated builds.

  system metadata are resolved when creating the source archive. For example, automatically
  generated Git archives omit all of the commit tag information, potentially resulting in
  incorrect version details in the resulting builds.

How?
~~~~

Ideally, **a source distribution archive should include all the files
from the package's Git repository** that are necessary to build the package
itself, run its test suite, build and install its documentation, and any other
files that may be useful to end users, such as shell completions, editor
support files, and so on.

This point applies only to the files belonging to the package itself.
The downstream packaging process, much like Python package managers, will
provision the necessary Python dependencies, system tools and external
libraries that are needed by your package and its build scripts. However,
the files listing these dependencies (for example, ``requirements*.txt`` files)
should also be included, to help downstreams determine the needed dependencies,
and check for changes in them.

Some projects are concerned about increasing the size of source distributions,

> or do not wish Python packaging tools to fall back to source distributions

Reviewer 3: I sort of feel this assumes too much. I know enough about Python packaging (I think!) to know that this is alluding to sdist files on PyPI (or other indexes), but I think that could made more explicit. It's probably worth explicitly saying something like "put your sdist on PyPI" (or other indexes), and linking terms like "sdist" to definitions.

Author: Ah, good idea. I've gotten mixed up between assuming "source distribution" as PyPI specific term, and simultaneously using it to mean source archives in general.

automatically. In these cases, a good compromise may be to publish a separate
source archive for downstream use, for example by attaching it to a GitHub
release. Alternatively, large files, such as test data, can be split into
separate archives.

A good idea is to use your source distribution in the release workflow.
For example, the :ref:`build` tool does exactly that — it first builds a source
distribution, and then uses it to build a wheel. This ensures that the source
distribution actually works, and that it won't accidentally install fewer files
than the official wheels.

> Ideally, use the source distribution also run tests, build documentation,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ideally, also use the source distribution to run tests, build documentation,
```

and so on, or add specific tests to make sure that all necessary files were
actually included. Understandably, this requires more effort, so it's fine
not do that — downstream packagers will report any missing files promptly.

.. _no-internet-access-in-builds:

Do not use the Internet during the build process
------------------------------------------------

Why?
~~~~

Downstream builds are frequently done in sandboxed environments that cannot
access the Internet. The package sources are unpacked into this environment,
and all the necessary dependencies are installed.

Even if this is not the case, and assuming that you took sufficient care to
properly authenticate downloads, using the Internet is discouraged for a number
of reasons:

- The Internet connection may be unstable (e.g. due to poor reception)
  or suffer from temporary problems that could cause the process to fail
  or hang.

> - The remote resources may become temporarily or even permanently

Reviewer 3: Also worth adding that the external resource may change, making your build not reproducible?

Author: Will add, thanks.

  same library being loaded in the same process (for example, attempting to
  import two Python packages that link to different versions of the same library).
  This sometimes works without incident, but it can also lead to anything from library
  loading errors, to subtle runtime bugs, to catastrophic system failures.

- Last but not least, static linking and vendoring results in duplication,
  and may increase the use of both disk space and memory.

How?
~~~~

A good compromise between the needs of both parties is to provide a switch
between using vendored and system dependencies. Ideally, if the package has
multiple vendored dependencies, it should provide both individual switches
for each dependency, and a general switch to control the default for them,
e.g. via a ``USE_SYSTEM_DEPS`` environment variable.

If the user requests using system dependencies, and a particular dependency
is either missing or incompatible, the build should fail with an explanatory
message rather than fall back to a vendored version. This gives the packager
the opportunity to notice their mistake and a chance to consciously decide
how to solve it.

> Note that it is reasonable for upstream projects to leave *testing* of building with

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is reasonable for upstream projects to leave *testing* of building with
```
Style nit: "Note that" generally adds no meaning, prefer fewer words to say the same thing.

system dependencies to their downstream repackagers. The goal of these guidelines
is to facilitate more effective collaboration between upstream projects and downstream
repackagers, not to suggest upstream projects take on tasks that downstream repackagers
are better equipped to handle.

> Note that it is reasonable for upstream projects to leave *testing* of building with

Reviewer 3: Paragraph is duplicated.

Author: Thanks. GitHub is clearly messing merging suggestions up sometimes :-(.

and the risk of applying inconsistent solutions to the same problem.

Establishing a good relationship between software maintainers and downstream
packagers can bring mutual benefits. Downstreams are often willing to share
their experience, time and hardware to improve your package. They are
sometimes in a better position to see how your package is used in practice,
and to provide information about its relationships with other packages that
would otherwise require significant effort to obtain.
Packagers can often find bugs before your users hit them in production,
provide bug reports of good quality, and supply patches whenever they can.
For example, they are regularly active in ensuring the packages they redistribute
are updated for any compatibility issues that arise when a new Python version
is released.

Please note that downstream builds include not only binary redistribution,
but also source builds done on user systems (in source-first distributions
such as Gentoo Linux, for example).

.. _provide-complete-source-distributions:

Provide complete source distributions
-------------------------------------

Why?
~~~~

> The vast majority of downstream packagers prefer to build packages from source,

Reviewer 7: “Prefer” is not enough strong word here. For most distributions (all Linux ones for sure) not having source code available is the red line, which we don’t cross over.

Author: Well, you have a point here, though I need to think how to word it better. Yes, there is a fair number of Linux distributions that distribute free packages only, but definitely **not all of them**. And then, "having source available" isn't necessarily equivalent to actually using it (I mean, there are packagers who use upstream binary packages for some reason even though they could use sources). And we are talking of Python here, and for pure Python packages "wheels" supply the "source code" just as well as source distributions.

But yes, I think it's a fair point to make that for some downstreams building from source is a must. I just don't think we can use "vast majority" anymore then.

in the package metadata, and are fetched during the build and installation
process by *frontends* (such as :ref:`build` or :ref:`pip`). Downstreams use
frontends that use local provisioning for Python dependencies.

Ideally, custom build scripts should not even attempt to access the Internet
at all, unless explicitly requested to. If any resources are missing and need
to be fetched, they should ask the user for permission first. If that is not
feasible, the next best thing is to provide an opt-out switch to disable
all Internet access. This could be done e.g. by checking whether
a ``NO_NETWORK`` environment variable is set to a non-empty value.

Since downstreams frequently also run tests and build documentation, the above
should ideally extend to these processes as well.

Please also remember that if you are fetching remote resources, you absolutely
must *verify their authenticity* (usually against a hash), to protect against
the file being substituted by a malicious party.

.. _support-system-dependencies-in-builds:

Support building against system dependencies
--------------------------------------------

> Why?

Reviewer 7: I think the order of paragraphs in the section is in the wrong order: I would first explain why dynamic linking and using system libraries is important and only then add that there might be some problems with it and static linking/vendoring may be the only solution.

Author: I think this order makes comprehension easier. It says "you may want to do it because A, however none of A apply to downstream redistribution, and there are important reasons B to provide an option not to do it".

I think the other order of "you shouldn't do it because B, but you will do it anyway because of A, however A doesn't really apply to us, so give us an option" is more back-and-forth.

Reviewer: Given the target audience, I agree with @mgorny on this one - the current order starts by saying things the target audience (upstream developers) will typically agree with, which is then likely to put them in a more receptive mood when we explain the differences between downstream and upstream.

If we start the other way around (by covering the downstream perspective first), upstream developers will likely have already tuned out by the time we attempt to explain that we understand that "build for cross-platform portability" vs "build for platform internal consistency" drives genuinely different priorities and desirable outcomes in this space.

should also be included, to help downstreams determine the needed dependencies,
and check for changes in them.

Some projects have concerns related to Python package managers using source
distributions from PyPI. They do not wish to increase their size with files
that are not used by these tools, or they do not wish to publish source
distributions at all, as they enable a problematic or outright nonfunctional
fallback to building the particular project from source. In these cases, a good
compromise may be to publish a separate source archive for downstream use
elsewhere, for example by attaching it to a GitHub release. Alternatively,
large files, such as test data, can be split into separate archives.

> On the other hand, some projects (NumPy_, for instance) decide to install tests

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the other hand, some projects (NumPy_, for instance) decide to include tests
```

Author: Not sure about this. It could be ambiguous over what "Python package" means here, in particular whether it doesn't just mean including them in the source distribution of the package.

Author: Perhaps "include tests in their installed packages"?

Reviewer 3: I think that would be clearer, yes.
